the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu okay
so so far we've learned how to do double
integrals in terms of XY coordinates or
also how to switch to Polar
coordinates but more generally there's a
lot of different changes of variables
that you might want to
do okay so today we're going to see how
to change
variables if you want how to do
substitutions in double integrals
okay so let me start with a simple
example let's say that we want to find
the
area of an
ellipse
with sem AIS A and B okay so that
means you know an ellipse is just like a
squished
Circle and
so there's a and there's B and the
equation of that ellipse is X a 2 plus
y/ b squar equals 1 well that's the
curve and the inside region is where
this is less than
one okay so it's just like a circle but
where you have rescaled X and Y
differently so let's say we want to find
the area of that I mean maybe you know
what the area is but let's do it as
double
integral
so oh you know if you find that area is
to easy you can integrate any function
of the ellipse if you
prefer but let's do it just with ARA so
we know that we want to integrate just
the area element let's say DX dy over
the region inside the ellipse that's x/
a
2 + y/ b^ 2 less than
1 now we can try to set this up in terms
of X and Y coordinates you know set up
the bounds by solving for first for X as
a function of Y if we do it this order
and well do the usual stuff that doesn't
look very pleasant and it's certainly
not the best way to do
it okay if this were a circle we would
switch to Polar coordinates well we
can't quite do that yet but you you know
an ellipse is just a squished Circle so
maybe we want to actually first rescale
X and Y by A and B to reduce to the case
of a
circle so to do
that what we'd like to do is
set x/ a to be U and Y / B to be V so
we'll have two new variables u and v and
we'll try to redo our integral in terms
of u and v
so how do we do the
substitution so in terms of u and v the
condition the region that we're
integrating on will become u s + V sare
less than 1 which is arguably nicer than
the ellipse that's what what why we're
doing it but we need to know what to do
with DX and
Dy well here the answer is pretty easy
because we just change X and Y
separately we do two independent
substitutions Okay so so if we
set you know if we set u equals x a that
means du is 1 / a
DX and here DV is 1 / B
Dy
so we it's very tempting to write and
here we actually we can write in this
particular case that D DV is 1 / AB DX d
y
okay so let me rewrite
that okay so I get du DV equals 1 / AB
DX Dy or equivalently DX
Dy is AB *
DV okay so in my double integral
I'm going to write AB D
DV okay so
now my double
integral becomes well the double
integral of a constant in terms of u and
v so I can take the constant out I will
get a Time double
integral over U + V sare less than 1 du
DV and that is an integral that we know
how to
do well because it's the area it's just
the area of a unit circle so we can just
say oh this is AB time the area of the
unit
disk which we know to be
P or if somehow you had some function to
integrate then you could have switched
to Polar coordinates you know setting U
equals r cos Theta V equal R sin Theta
and then doing it in polar
coordinates okay so here the
substitution worked pretty
easily the question is you know if we do
a change of variables where the relation
between X and Y and un and V is more
complicated what can we do can we still
do this or do we have to be more careful
and actually we have to be more careful
so that's what we're going to see next
but any question about this first
no
okay okay so see if a general problem
when we try to do this is to figure out
what is the scale factor what's the
relation between DX Dy and du
DV so we need to find the scaling
Factor so we need to
find you know DX Dy versus d u
DV so let's do another example that's
still pretty easy
but a little bit less
easy okay so let's say that for some
reason we want to set we want to do the
change of variables U = 3x - 2 Y and v =
x + y why would we want to do that well
that might be to simplify the integrant
because we're integrating a function
that happens to be actually involving
these guys rather than X and Y or it
might be to simplify the bounds because
maybe we're integrating over a region
whose equation in XY coordinates is very
hard to write down but it becomes much
easier in terms of u and v and then you
know the bounds will be much easier to
set up with u and
v anyway so you know whatever the reason
might be but typically it would be to
simplify the
integrant of a
bounds well how do we convert the xdy to
DV so we want to understand what's the
relation
between let's call Da the area element
in XY coordinate so da is DX Dy maybe Dy
DX depending on the
order and the area element in UV
coordinates let me call that da Prime
just you know to make it look different
so that would just be duv or DV du
depending on which order I will want to
set it up
in
so to find this relation it's probably
best to draw a picture to see what
happens you know let's consider a small
piece of the XY
plane with area Delta a corresponding to
just you know a box with sides Delta
Y and Delta
X okay and let's try to figure out what
it will look like in terms of u and v
and then we'll say well when we
integrate we really summing the value of
a function over a lot of small boxes
times their area but the problem is that
the area of a box in here is not the
same as the area of a box in UV
coordinates you know there maybe it will
look
like actually you know if you see that
these are linear changes of variables
you know that a rectangle will become a
parallelogram after the change of
variables so the area of a parallelogram
Delta a prime
well we have to figure out how they're
related so that we can decide what
conversion factor what's the exchange
rate between these two currencies for
AR
okay any questions at this
point no still with
me mostly I see a lot of tired
faces uh yes
Del uh why is Delta a prime a
parallelogram that's a very good
question well see here if I look at this
side of the rectangle say this vertical
side it means I'm going to increase y
keeping X the same if I look at the
formulas for u and v they're linear
formulas in terms of X and Y so if I
just increase
y see that U is going to decrease at a
rate of two V is going to increase at
the rate of one at constant rates and it
doesn't matter whether I was looking at
this side or at that side so basically
straight lines become straight lines and
you know if they're parall they stay
parallel so if you just look at what the
transformation from XY to UV does it
does this kind of thing actually this
transformation here you can express by
your Matrix and remember we've seen what
matrices do to pictures we just you know
take straight lines to straight lines
they keep the notion of being parallel
but of course they mess up lengths
angles and all that
okay
so let's see so let's try to figure out
what is the area of this guy well in
fact what I've been
saying about you know this
transformation being linear and
transforming all of the vertical lines
in the same way all the horizontal lines
in the same way tells me also I should
have a constant scaling Factor right
because how much I've scaled my my
rectangle doesn't doesn't depend on
where my rectangle is if I move my
rectangle to somewhere else I have a
rectangle of the same size same shape it
will become a parram of the same size
same shape somewhere else so in fact I
can just take the simplest rectangle I
can think of and see how its area
changes and if you don't believe me then
you know try with any of rectangle you
will see it works exactly the same
way okay so I claim that the area
scaling Factor
here in this case doesn't
depend on the choice of the
rectangle and I should say that because
we're actually doing a linear change of
variables
so you know somehow the exchange rate
between UV and XY is going to be the
same
everywhere so let's try to see what
happens to the simplest rectangle I can
think of namely just the unit
square and you know if you don't trust
me then you know while I'm doing this
one do it with a different rectangle do
the same calculation and see that you
will get the same conversion ratio
so let's say that I take the unit
Square so something that has size that
goes from Z to one both in X and Y
directions okay and let's try to figure
out what it looks like on the other side
so here the area is
one let's try to draw it in terms of u
and v coordinates
okay so here we have xal 0 yal 0 well
that tells us u and v are going to be
zero next let's look at this corner well
in X Y coordinates this is 1 0 if you
plug x = 1 y = 0 you get U = 3 V equals
one so that
goes somewhere here
and
so this edge of a square will become
this line
here okay next let's look at that point
so that point here was
01 if I
plug x = 0 y = 1 I will get -2 and one
so this
Edge goes
here then if you put x = 1 y = 1 you'll
get u = 1 V = two so I
want one
two and this edges will go
to these edges here and you see it does
look like a
parallelogram okay so now what's the
area of this
parallelogram well we can get that by
taking the determinant of these two
vectors so one of them is
31 and the other one is - 2
1 that will be 3 + 2 that's five
okay this parallelogram is apparently
five times the size of this Square here
it looks like it's less because I've
somehow changed my scale I mean my unit
length is smaller here than here
so but it should be a lot bigger than
that okay and if you do the same
calculations not with you know zero and
one but with X and X Plus Delta X and so
on you will still find that the area has
been multiplied by
five so that tells us
actually for
any of our
rectangle area is
also multiplied by
five so that tells us
that da Prime the area element in UV
coordinate is worth five times more that
the than the area element in XY
coordinat
so that means the udv is worth five
times
dxdy what's so
funny what
oh okay
rectangle okay is it okay
now or did I spot did I misspell other
wordss no okay it's really hard to see
when you that closeup it's much easier
from a
distance okay
so yeah so we've said our transformation
multiplies areas by
five and so D UV is 5 time DX Dy so if
I'm integrating some function DX
Dy then when I switch to UV coordinates
I will have to replace that by 1 D
UV okay and of course I would also you
know here my function would probably
involve X and y I will replace them by
U's and v's and the bounds well the
shape of my region in the XY coordinates
I will have to switch to some shape in
the UV coordinate and that's also
something that might be easy or might be
tricky depending on what region we're
looking at so usually we'll do changes
of variables to actually simplify the
region you know so that it becomes
easier to set up the
bounds so
anyway so this is kind of an
illustration of a general case and why
is that well here it looks very easy you
know we're just using linear formulas
and somehow the relation between dxdy
and dudv is the same everywhere if you
take actually more complicated changes
of variables that's not true because
usually you will expect that you know
there's some places where the rescaling
is maybe enlarging things and some other
places where things are shrunk
so certainly the exchange rate between
DV and dxdy will fluctuate from point to
point you know it's same as if you're
trying to change dollars to Euros it
depends on where you do it you will get
a better rate or a worse
one
um
so you know we have to of course we'll
get a formula where actually the scaling
Factor will depend on X and Y or on u
and
v but if you fix a point then we have
linear approximation and linear
approximation tells us we can do as if
our function is just a linear function
of X and Y so then we can do it the same
way we did
here okay so let's let's try to think
about
that so in the general case well that
means you know we'll replace X and Y by
new coordinates u and v and u and v will
be some functions of X and Y
so well we'll have an approximation
formula which tells us that the change
in U if I change x or y a little bit
will be roughly U subx * change in X
Plus U sub y * change in
y and the change in
V will be
roughly V subx Delta X Plus V suby Delta
y or the have way to say
if you want in Matrix form is Delta U
Delta
V is sry approximately equal
to u subx u
suby v subx v suby
times Delta X and Delta
y
okay so if
we look at that what it tells us in fact
is that if we take a
small rectangle in XY
coordinates so that
means you know we have a certain point
XY and then we have a certain width oh
this is going to be too small
neither
well so I have my width Delta X I have
my height Delta y
this is going to correspond to a
small UV
parallelogram
and you know what the shape and the size
of that parallelogram are depend on the
partial derivatives of u and v so in
particular they depend on at which point
we are but still at a given point it's a
bit like that
and so if we do the same argument as
before what we'll see is that the
scaling factor is actually the
determinant of this
transformation so that's one thing
that maybe we didn't emphasize enough
when we did matrices at the beginning of
a semester but when you have a linear
transformation between variables the
determinant of that transformation
represents how it scales
areas okay so one way to think about it
is just you know to try and see what
happens um you know take take this side
this side in X Y coordinates corresponds
to Delta X and zero and now if you take
the image of that you if you see what
happens to Delta U and Delta V that will
be basically U subx Delta X and V subx
Delta X there's no Delta y for the other
side okay so maybe I should do it
actually so you know if we move in the
XY coordinates by Delta X and
zero then Delta U and Delta V will be U
subx approximately U subx Delta X and V
subx Delta
X and
in the other hand if you move in the
other direction along the other side of
your rectangle Z and Delta
y then the change in U and the change in
V will correspond to well how does U
change that's U sub y Delta Y and V
changes by V sub y Delta Y and so now if
you take the determinant of these two
vectors okay so these are the sides of
your
parallelogram up here and if you take
this sides to get the area of the
parallelogram you would need to take the
determinant and the determinant will be
the determinant of this Matrix times
Delta x * Delta
y so the area in UV coordinates will be
the determinant of the Matrix times
Delta X Delta
Y and
so what I'm trying to say
is
that when you have a general change of
variables duv versus dxdy is given by
the determinant of this Matrix of
partial
derivatives it doesn't matter in which
order you write it I mean you can put
you know in rows or in columns uh if you
transpose a matrix that doesn't change
the determinant it's just you know any
sensible Matrix that you can write will
have the correct determinant
[Music]
awesome
okay
so what we need to know is the following
thing so we Define something called the
Jacobian of a change of
variables and use the letter j or maybe
a more
useful
notation is partial of UV over partial
of XY that's a very strange notation I
mean that doesn't mean that we're
actually taking the partial der of
anything okay it's just a notation to
remind us that this has to do with a
ratio between DV and DX Dy and it's made
using it's obtained using the partial
derivatives of u and v with respect to X
and
Y so it's the
determinant of the
Matrix u subx u sub y v subx v sub y The
Matrix that I had up there
okay and what we need to
know is that du U
DV is equal to the absolute value of J
DX Dy or if you prefer to see it in the
easier to remember version it's absolute
value of D of UV over partial
XY DX
Dy okay so this is just
what you need to remember and it says
that the area in UV coordinates is worth
well the ratio to the area in the XY
coordinates is given by this Jacobian
determinant except one small thing it's
given by actually the absolute value of
this guy okay so what's going on here
what's going on here is when we are
saying the determinant of the
transformation tells us how the is
Multiplied there's a small catch
remember determinants are equal to areas
up to sign sometimes determinant is
negative because of reversing the
orientation of things but the area is
still the same area is always
positive so the area elements are
actually related by the absolute value
of this guy okay so if you find you know
minus 10 as your answer then dudv is
still 10 times dxdy
okay so yeah I mean I didn't put it all
together because then you would have two
sets of vertical bars see I mean this is
a vertical bar for absolute value this
is a vertical bar for determinant
they're not the
same um that's the one thing to
remember okay any questions about
this
no okay
so actually
let's do a first example of that let's
check what we had for Polar
coordinates you know last time I told
you well if we have DX Dy we should
switch it to RDR D Theta and we had some
argument for that by looking at the area
of a small piece of you know a small
circular sector but um
you know let's check again using this
new
method so in polar coordinates I'm
setting x = r cosine Theta y = r sin
Theta so for
jacoban for this change of
variables so let's say I'm trying to
find the partial derivatives of X Y with
respect to R
Theta well what is okay let me actually
write them here again just for
you and so what does that become partial
X over partial R is
just coine
Theta partial X over partial Theta is R
sin
Theta sorry I guess I'm going to run out
of space here so let me do it
underneath so we said X subr is cosine
Theta x sub Theta is netive R sin Theta
y sub R is
s y sub Theta is R
cosine and now if we compute this
determinant we'll
get R cosine Square theta plus r sin
Square Theta and that simplifies to
R
so DX
Dy is well absolute value of R Dr D
Theta but remember that R is always
positive so it's Rd D
Theta
okay so that's another way to justify
how we did double integrals in polar
coordinates
okay any questions on
that
where yeah
okay um are we switching from Polar to
XY XY to Polar
uh yeah so this one seems to be
switching well it depends what you do
see so okay actually here's an important
thing that I didn't quite
say so I said you know we're going to
switch from XY to UV we can also switch
from UV to
XY and you know this conversion ratio
the jacoban works both ways once you
have found you know the ratio between DV
and dxdy then it works one way or it
works the other way I mean here of
course we get the answer in terms of R
so this would let us you know switch
from XY to R Theta but we could also
switch from R Theta to XY just with with
write Dr D theta equals 1 / R DX Dy and
then we'd have of course to replace R by
its formula in XY coordinates usually we
don't do that usually we actually start
with XY and switch to Polar
but um so in general you know when you
have this formula relating DV with d xdy
you can use it both ways either to
switch from the udv to dxdy or the other
way
around and the thing that I'm not
telling you but but now I should
probably tell you is you know I could
Define two jacobians because if I solve
for XY in terms of UV instead of UV in
terms of XY then I can compute two
different jacobians I can compute
partial UV over partial XY or I can
compute partial XY over partial UV if I
have a formulas both ways well the good
news is these guys are the inverse of
each other so you know the two formulas
that you might get are consistent
okay so useful
remark you know so
say that you can
compute
both these guys well then actually their
product will just be one so you know
they're the inverse of each other so it
doesn't matter
which one you compute you can compute
whichever one is the easiest to compute
no matter of which which one of the two
you
need and one way to see that is that in
fact you know we're looking at the
determinant of these matrices that tell
us the relation between the variables so
if one of them tells you how Delta U
Delta V relate to Delta X Delta y the
other one does the opposite thing it
means they're the inverse matrices and
the determinant of the inverse Matrix is
the inverse of a
determinant
so very
really interchangeable I mean you can
just you know compute whichever one is
easiest so here if you wanted you know
Dr D Theta in terms of DX Dy it's easier
to do this and then move the r over
there then to First solve for R and
Theta as functions of X and Y and then
do the entire thing again but you can do
it if you want I mean it
works oh yeah we have a useful remark so
I mentioned it but let me emphasize
again so now the ratio between DV and
dxdy it's not it's not a constant
anymore over there it used to be five
but now it's become c r or anything in
general it will be a function but
depends on the variables so it's not
true that you can just say oh I'll put a
constant times
DV
yes it would still work the same you
know you could imagine drawing a picture
where R and Theta are the cartisian
coordinates and your picture would be
completely messed up it would be a very
strange thing to do to try to draw you
know I I'm going to do it but don't take
notes and that you know you could try to
draw a picture like that and then you
know a circle would start looking like
you know a disc would look like that and
it would be very counterintuitive but
you could do it and that would be
equivalent to what we did with a
previous change of
variables so you know in this case
certainly you would never draw a picture
like
that but you could do
it okay
okay so now let's do a complete example
to see how things fit together you know
how we do
everything so let's say that we want to
compute so I have to warn you it's going
to be a very silly example it's an
example where it's much easier to
compute things without the change of
variables uh but you
know it's good practice in the sense
that we're going to make it so
complicated that if we can do this one
then we can do them all
so let's say that we want to compute
this and of course it's very easy to
compute it directly but let's say that
for some evil reason
uh we want to do that by changing
variables to U equal x and V equals
XY okay that's a very strange idea but
let's do it
anyway I mean normally you know you
would only do this kind of substitution
if either it simplifies a lot the
function you're integrating or it
simplifies a lot the region on which
you're
integrating and here nether happens
so but
anyway so the first thing we have to do
here is figure out what we're going to
be
integrating okay so to do that first we
should figure out what DX Dy will become
in terms of u and v so that's what we've
just seen using the jacoban okay so the
first thing to do is the area
element and for that we use the Jacobian
so well let's see the one that we can do
easily is partials of u and v with
respect to X and Y I mean the other one
is not very hard because here you can
solve easily but the one that's given to
you is partial of u and v with respect
to X and
Y so partial U partial X is one partial
U partial Y is zero partial V partial X
is
Y and partial V partial Y is
X okay so it's just
X so that means
that du
DV is X DX
Dy well it would be absolute value of x
but X is positive in our region so at
least we don't have to worry about that
okay so now that we have that we can try
to look at the
integrant in terms of u and
v okay so we were integrating X2 y DX d
y so
let's switch it well let's first switch
the DX Dy that becomes 1
/x d u
DV so that's actually XY d u
DV and what is XY in terms of u and v
well here at least we have a little bit
of luck you know XY is just V so that's
V
DV so in fact what we will be Computing
is a double integral over some
mysterious region of v d
DV okay now last but not least we'll
have to find what are the bounds for u
and v in the new
integral so that we know how to evaluate
this
in fact well we could do it duv or dvu
we don't know
yet oh amazing went all the way down
this time
okay
so it could be DVD if that's
easier so let's try to find the
bounds that's in this case that's the
hardest
part okay so let me draw a picture in XY
coordinates
and try to understand things using
that okay so X and Y go from 0 to one
the region that we want to integrate
over was just this
Square let's try to figure
out how u and v vary in there so let's
say that we are going to
do let's say we're going to do a DV Okay
so
what we want to understand is how u and
v vary in here what's going to
happen so the way we can think about it
is we try to figure out how we're
slicing our
region okay so here we're integrating
first over U that means we start by
keeping U
constant no by keeping V constant as U
changes okay so U changes
as V is
constant what does it mean that I'm
keeping V constant well what is v v is
XY so that means I keep XY equals
constant what does the curve x yals
constant look like well it's just a
hyperbola okay yal constant
X so if I look
at the various
values of V that I can take for each
value of V if I fix a value of V I will
be moving on one of these red
curves okay and U well U is the same
thing as X so that means youu will
increase you know here maybe it will be
0.1 and it will increase to all the way
to one
here okay so we're just
traveling on each of these slices
now so the question we must answer here
is for a given value of V what up bounds
for you so I'm traveling on my curve v
equals constant and trying to figure out
when do I enter my region when when do I
leave it well I enter it when I go
through this side so the question is
what's the value of U
here well we don't know that very easily
until we look at these
formulas so U equals x okay but we don't
know what x is at that
point well U equal x and V equal XY what
do we know
here well we don't know X but we know y
certainly okay
so let's forget about trying to find U
and let's say for now we know yals
1 well if we set y equals 1 that tells
us that that u and v are both equal to X
so in terms of u and v the equation of
this in u v coordinates is U equals
V okay me the other way to do it is say
that you know you want yals 1 you want
to know what is y in terms of u and v
well it's easy Y is v
u so let me actually add an extra step
in case that's
so we know that Y is V / U equal 1 so
that means U equal V is my
equation okay so when I'm here when I'm
entering my region the value of U at
this point is just v u equals
V that's the hard part now we need to
figure out you know so we start at U
equals v u increases increases increases
where does it exit it exits when we here
what's the value of U here one that one
is easier right this side
here so this side here is xal 1 that
means U equal 1 so we stop at U equals
1 now we've done the inner
integral what about the
outer so we have to figure out what is
the first and what is the last value of
V that we'll want to
consider well if you look at all these
hyperbolas XY equals constant what's the
smallest value of XY that we'll ever
want to look at in here zero okay let me
actually where's my yellow Chu is it
no so this one here that's actually V
equal Z
so we'll start at V equal
Z and what's the last hypera we want to
look at well it's the one that's right
there in the
corner this one here and that's V equals
1 so V goes from Z to
one okay and now we can compute this I
mean it's not particularly easier than
that one but it's not harder
either how else could we have gotten
this bounds because that was quite evil
so I would like to recommend that you
give it a try this way you know in case
it works well just try to picture what
are the
slices in terms of u and v and how you
travel on them where you enter where you
leave staying in the XY picture if that
somehow doesn't work well another way is
to draw a picture in the UV
coordinates oops
switch to a UV
picture so what do I mean by that well
we had here a picture in XY
coordinates where we had our
sides and we're going to try to draw
what it looks like in terms of u and v
so here we say this is xal 1 that
becomes U equals 1 so we'll draw U equal
1 this side we say it is y = 1 that
becomes u = v that's what we've done
over there okay so U equal
V now we have two other sides to deal
with well let's look at this one first
so that was xal Z what happens when x
equals z well both u and v are zero so
this side actually gets squished in the
change of variables you know it's a bit
it's a bit strange but it's a bit the
same thing as you know when you switch
to Polar coordinates at the
R is zero but Theta can be anything you
know sometimes not it's not always one
point is one point so anyway this is the
origin and then the last Side Y equals z
and X varies just becomes V equals
zero so somehow in the change of
variables this Square becomes this
triangle and now if we want to integrate
du DV it means we're going to slice by V
equals
constant so we're going to integrate
other slices like this and you see for
each value of v We Go From U equals V to
U equals 1 and V goes from zero to
1 okay so you get the same bounce just
by drawing a different picture so it's
up to you to decide whether you prefer
to you know think on this picture or
Draw that one instead it depends on
which problems you're doing